Defendant-appellant Domingo Ramos–Mejía asseverates that he did not understand the criminal intent required as an element of the crime to which he pleaded and that the district court accepted his guilty plea to that charge without an adequate factual basis. For these reasons, he urges us to vitiate his guilty plea. After careful consideration, we reject the appellant's asseverational array.
The travel of the case is easily traced. A federal grand jury sitting in the District of Puerto Rico indicted the appellant on a charge of conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute 5 kilograms or more of cocaine. See 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1), 846. He initially maintained his innocence, but later entered into a plea agreement. In pursuance of that agreement, he pleaded guilty to conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute at least 3.5 but less than 5 kilograms of cocaine (a quantity below that originally charged in the indictment).
The district court accepted the plea and subsequently imposed a 78–month incarcerative sentence. This timely appeal ensued.
Before turning to the meat of this appeal, we pause to note that the plea agreement contained a waiver-of-appeal provision. This provision purposed to foreclose any appeal as long as the district court accepted the plea and sentenced the appellant in accordance with the plea agreement's terms and recommendations.
But even though the district court sentenced the appellant within the parameters of the plea agreement, the waiver-of-appeal provision does not pretermit this appeal. Where, as here, an appeal challenges the validity of the plea itself, a waiver-of-appeal provision lacks force. See United States v. Chambers, 710 F.3d 23, 27 (1st Cir.2013). After all, if a plea is invalid, the plea agreement (and, thus, the waiver provision contained within it) disintegrates.
We begin our discussion of the merits with the abecedarian proposition that a defendant has no absolute right to withdraw his guilty plea. See United States v. Mercedes Mercedes, 428 F.3d 355, 359 (1st Cir.2005). When, as in this case, a defendant seeks for the first time to withdraw his plea in the court of appeals, his request will be granted only if he can show that the district court's acceptance of the plea was plainly erroneous. See United States v. Davila, No. 12–167, 2013 WL 2631064, at *7–8 (June 13, 2013). Plain error review imposes a heavy burden on the appellant, who must demonstrate: “(1) that an error occurred (2) which was clear or obvious and which not only (3) affected the defendant's substantial rights, but also (4) seriously impaired the fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings.” United States v. Duarte, 246 F.3d 56, 60 (1st Cir.2001).
Against this backdrop, we turn to the appellant's assertion that his plea was not knowing, intelligent, and voluntary. Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 11(b)(1)(G) requires that a district court, before accepting a guilty plea, “must inform the defendant of, and determine that the defendant understands, ․ the nature of each charge to which the defendant is pleading.” This rule functions “to ensure that a defendant who pleads guilty does so with full comprehension of the specific attributes of the charge and the possible consequences of the plea.” United States v. McDonald, 121 F.3d 7, 11 (1st Cir.1997).
The charge to which the appellant pleaded guilty involved conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute drugs. Proof of such a charge entails proof of the existence of the charged conspiracy, the defendant's knowledge of it, and his voluntary participation in it. See United States v. Nelson–Rodriguez, 319 F.3d 12, 27–28 (1st Cir.2003). A conspiracy charge requires, at a minimum, the same degree of criminal intent as the underlying substantive offense. Ingram v. United States, 360 U.S. 672, 678 (1959). It follows that, for guilt to attach in a drug conspiracy case, a defendant must have conspired knowingly to possess the drugs with the intent to distribute them. See United States v. Echeverri, 982 F.2d 675, 677–79 (1st Cir.1993).
The appellant asserts that, when he entered his plea, he was unaware that the government had to prove his knowledge of a conspiracy to distribute drugs (as opposed to some other contraband) and his specific intent to effectuate the object of the conspiracy (distributing drugs). He suggests that the district court kept him in the dark by failing sufficiently to inform him about these matters, preferring instead to read the charge from the indictment and then inquire whether that was what he had done. The appellant posits that, by charting such a course, the court violated Rule 11(b)(1)(G).1
In this case, the change-of-plea colloquy, though not a textbook model, was adequate. In order to satisfy Rule 11, the district court need not employ a “specific script, a set of magic words, or even certain types of inquiries.” United States v. Ward, 518 F .3d 75, 83 (1st Cir.2008). Here, the court assured itself of the defendant's competence to plead, had the prosecutor summarize both the plea agreement and the government's available proof, and obtained the appellant's acknowledgment that those summaries were accurate. The appellant then confirmed to the court his desire “[t]o plead guilty [to] what [he was] being accused of.”
The court made certain that the appellant had read the indictment and understood both the charge and the terms of the plea agreement. The court also verified that the appellant had reviewed these materials with his attorney. Finally, the court read aloud the charge limned in the indictment, and the appellant agreed that he had knowingly participated in that activity.
This, we think, was enough. Rule 11(b)(1)(G) “does not require the court to explain the technical intricacies of the charges in the indictment.” United States v. Cruz–Rivera, 357 F.3d 10, 13 (1st Cir.2004). Under ordinary circumstances, it is sufficient in a plea colloquy for a district court to “ascertain that a defendant is aware of the nature of the charge against him by reading the charge in the indictment to the defendant and obtaining his competent acknowledgment that he understands the charge.” United States v. Delgado–Hernández, 420 F.3d 16, 26 (1st Cir.2005); see United States v. Corporán–Cuevas, 244 F.3d 199, 203 (1st Cir.2001).
This is not to say that merely reading the formal charge will be sufficient in every case. The process through which the court ensures the defendant's understanding of the charge may vary depending on the attributes of the particular defendant, the nature of the specific offense, and the complexity of the attendant circumstances. See Corporán–Cuevas, 244 F.3d at 203; see also Fed.R.Crim.P. 11 advisory committee's note. One size does not fit all.
Here, however, the environmental factors were not extraordinary. This is a run-of-the-mine case, involving a mature defendant with a history of gainful employment. The appellant was facing only a single charge—and that charge was not a complicated one. Moreover, the circumstances attendant to the charged crime were straightforward. Given these considerations, we believe that a reading of the charge sufficed. See, e.g., United States v. Ramirez–Benitez, 292 F.3d 22, 27 (1st Cir.2002).
If more were needed—and we doubt that it is—the record in this case contains other indicia of the appellant's appreciation of the elements of the charged crime. The plea agreement contained a factual narrative that described what the government said it could prove. It further explained that the appellant was pleading guilty to “knowingly and intentionally combining, conspiring, and agreeing with others to ․ possess with intent to distribute” cocaine.2 The word “cocaine” was underscored and in bold, making pellucid that the charged conspiracy was one trafficking in drugs, not other goods. The text of the plea agreement is relevant to this appeal inasmuch as the agreement explicitly memorialized the appellant's review of it with his attorney, his satisfaction with his attorney's representation, the absence of any coercion, and hi