Defendant Samuel Dixon was convicted of being a felon in possession of a firearm and ammunition in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) after police executed a search warrant for his apartment and found a pistol and eight rounds of ammunition. Dixon appeals his conviction on several bases. First, he argues that the affidavit used to support the search of his person and apartment was insufficient to establish probable cause and so the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress. Second, he argues that his conviction violates the Commerce Clause because the government did not prove the interstate commerce element of the felon-in-possession charge and so the court erred in denying his motion for judgment of acquittal. Third, he argues that the district court's jury instructions concerning the interstate commerce element were erroneous. We find no merit in his arguments and affirm.
I.
On February 11, 2011, Boston Police Detective Michael Ross filed an affidavit in support of two search warrants: one for Dixon's person and one for 12 York Street, Apartment 1 in the Dorchester neighborhood of Boston. The affidavit first recounted Detective Ross's extensive experience with drug investigations, then detailed his investigation into a suspected drug trafficking scheme in the Dorchester/Roxbury area.
The affidavit noted that Ross had received information from a confidential informant (CI) “[w]ithin the last few months” that a black male with short hair who was approximately forty years old, six feet tall, and 200 pounds was selling crack cocaine in that area. The CI had purchased crack cocaine from that man in the past. The CI provided Ross with the phone number he had used to contact the suspect and purchase drugs. The CI also told Ross that the suspect drove a red Ford SUV.
The affidavit stated that this CI had provided Ross's unit with “reliable information in the past that ha[d] led to the arrests and convictions of individual(s) for violation of the drug laws and also the seizure of drug(s), money, firearm(s) and ammunition.” Ross explained that he had intentionally excluded details about those prior investigations from the affidavit in order to protect the CI from harm and ensure that the Boston police would be able to “cultivate future informants.”
The affidavit then detailed a series of controlled buys during which the CI had purchased what appeared to be drugs from the suspect. During the first controlled buy, which took place “[w]ithin the last few months,” officers searched the CI to establish that he was free of contraband or money, then had him call the suspect to arrange a purchase. Officers provided the CI with money, and the CI then proceeded to a “meet location.” The police followed the CI and observed the suspect's arrival. Officers watched the suspect make an exchange with the CI following a brief conversation and then followed the suspect to York Street in Dorchester. The CI reconvened with Ross and gave him the substance that he had purchased. Ross's “training and experience led [him] to believe the items(s) handed to [him] by [the CI] was a quantity of crack cocaine.”
Two additional, nearly identical controlled buys were conducted, one “[w]ithin the last couple of months” and one “[w]ithin the last ninety-six hours.” Before the latter two buys, officers followed the suspect from 12 York Street to the meet location and also followed him back to York Street after the transaction concluded. The affidavit did not say that the officers saw an exchange between the CI and the suspect during either of the later buys, but afterward the CI handed Ross a substance that Ross believed was crack cocaine.
The affidavit described other efforts to confirm the CI's information. After the first controlled buy, Ross observed a red Ford Expedition, matching the CI's description of the suspect's vehicle, parked in the driveway at 12 York Street. Ross ran the Ford's plates and determined that it belonged to a man named Samuel Dixon, age 43, with an address of 12 York Street, Apartment 1. With that name in hand, Ross obtained a photograph of Dixon, and the CI identified him as the person from whom he had purchased cocaine. Dixon's driver's license listed his address as 12 York Street, Apartment 1, and Ross observed Dixon driving the red Ford SUV in the area on several occasions. Ross also called the telephone number that the CI had provided, which directed him to the voicemail of “Mr. Dixon.” Finally, Ross confirmed with the area utility provider that Dixon was the listed subscriber at 12 York Street, Apartment 1, with a phone number matching the one the CI had provided.
As to Dixon's apartment, the affidavit stated that, based on Ross's “training and experience” and the three controlled buys, and based on his observations of Dixon “entering and/or exiting 12 York St ․ before and/or after the purchases of crack cocaine,” Ross believed Dixon was “conducting a delivery service of crack cocaine” and using his apartment “as his base of operation.” Ross “believe[d] items used in the cooking, packaging and sale of crack cocaine” would be found there.
The two warrants were issued on February 11, 2011, and executed on February 16, 2011. Police stopped Dixon in his Ford Expedition less than a mile away from 12 York Street and informed him of the warrant. They searched Dixon, found no contraband, and took him to his apartment. Once there, the officers gave Dixon Miranda warnings and asked him if there were drugs or firearms in the apartment. He told them that there were drugs in his dresser and a firearm in either a toilet or his closet. The officers searched these locations and found drugs, drug paraphernalia, a firearm, and ammunition.
Dixon was charged with possession with intent to distribute cocaine, see 21 U.S.C. § 841(a), and being a felon in possession of a firearm and ammunition, see 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). He moved to suppress the fruits of the search on the same grounds he raises here—that the affidavit lacked sufficient facts to satisfy the probable cause requirement—but the district court denied the motion.1 Dixon was tried on the firearm charge and convicted by a jury.2 This appeal followed.
II.
Our review of a district court's denial of a motion to suppress is plenary. United States v. McCarthy, 77 F.3d 522, 529 (1st Cir.1996). Where our independent assessment of a suppression motion requires us to review the sufficiency of an affidavit supporting a search warrant, however, we afford an ample amount of deference to the issuing magistrate's finding of probable cause. See United States v. Ribeiro, 397 F.3d 43, 48 (1st Cir.2005); see also Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S. 213, 236 (1983) (“[W]e have repeatedly said that after-the-fact scrutiny by courts of the sufficiency of an affidavit should not take the form of de novo review.”). Accordingly, we will reverse “the magistrate judge's initial evaluation ․ only if we see no substantial basis for concluding that probable cause existed.” Ribeiro, 397 F.3d at 48 (internal quotation marks omitted).
“A warrant application must demonstrate probable cause to believe that (1) a crime has been committed—the ‘commission’ element, and (2) enumerated evidence of the offense will be found at the place searched—the so-called ‘nexus' element.” United States v. Feliz, 182 F.3d 82, 86 (1st Cir.1999). “Where, as here, the basis for the magistrate's probable cause finding was information provided by an unnamed information, the affidavit must provide some information from which the magistrate can assess the informant's credibility.” United States v. Greenburg, 410 F.3d 63, 67 (1st Cir.2005).
Our inquiry is a “practical, common-sense” one, Feliz, 182 F.3d at 86 (quoting Gates, 462 U.S. at 238), that takes into account the “totality of the circumstances,” United States v. Khounsavanh, 113 F.3d 279, 283 (1st Cir.1997) (internal quotation marks omitted). “[T]he facts presented to the magistrate need only ‘warrant a man of reasonable caution’ to believe that evidence of a crime will be found.” Feliz, 182 F.3d at 86 